[Congressional Bills 119th Congress] [From the U.S. Government Publishing Office] [H.R. 224 Enrolled Bill (ENR)] H.R.224 One Hundred Nineteenth Congress of the United States of America AT THE SECOND SESSION Begun and held at the City of Washington on Saturday, the third day of January, two thousand and twenty-six An Act To amend section 102(a)(20) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 to require the exclusion of service-connected disability compensation when determining whether a person is a person of low and moderate income, a person of low income, or a person of moderate income, and for other purposes. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. This Act may be cited as the ``Disabled Veterans Housing Support Act''. SEC. 2. SERVICE CONNECTED DISABILITY COMPENSATION. Section 102(a)(20) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5302(a)(20)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(C) Service-connected disability compensation.--When determining whether a person is a person of low and moderate income, a person of low income, or a person of moderate income under this paragraph, a State, unit of general local government, or Indian tribe shall exclude any service-connected disability compensation received by such person from the Department of Veterans Affairs.''. SEC. 3. REPORT. The Comptroller General of the United States shall, not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, submit to the Congress a report that-- (1) examines how service-connected disability compensation is treated for the purposes of determining eligibility for all programs administered by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development; (2) identifies any instances where service-connected disability compensation is treated in a manner inconsistent with the amendment made by section 2; and (3) with respect to each program administered by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in which service-connected disability compensation is treated inconsistently, provides legislative recommendations relating to how such program could better serve veteran populations, and under-served communities. Speaker of the House of Representatives. Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.